What Is an AI Engineer? (And How to Become One)

Key takeaways
Artificial intelligence (AI) engineers use their knowledge of AI and machine learning to develop computer applications and systems.
 The median total salary for an AI engineer in the United States is $138,000 [1].
AI engineering has various applications, including recommender systems on streaming platforms like Netflix, self-driving cars, surgical robots, and more. 
You can start a career in AI engineering by first learning technical skills like programming and statistics, applying for entry-level jobs, and building your work experience in the field.

What is AI engineering?
Artificial intelligence engineers are individuals who use AI and machine learning techniques to develop applications and systems that can help organizations increase efficiency, cut costs, increase profits, and make better business decisions.
By 2030, AI could contribute up to $19.9 trillion to the global economy and result in a 3.5 percent increase in global GDP, according to an IDC report [2]. This projected growth means organizations are turning to AI to help power their business decisions and increase efficiency. 
AI engineering focuses on developing the tools, systems, and processes that enable artificial intelligence to be applied in the real world. Any application where machines mimic human functions, such as solving problems and learning, can be considered artificial intelligence. Algorithms are “trained” by data, which helps them learn and perform better.

Everyday examples of AI engineering
You may have encountered the results of AI engineering when you use Netflix, Spotify, or YouTube, where machine learning customizes suggestions based on your behavior. Another popular example is in transportation, where self-driving cars are driven by AI and machine learning technology. It’s especially useful in the health care industry because AI can power robots to perform surgery and generate automated image diagnoses. 

AI engineer responsibilities: What do AI engineers do officially?
AI engineers play an important role in organizations that use AI. They chart the AI strategy and define the problems to be solved with AI. They’re in charge of building AI development and production infrastructure and then implementing it. Here are some specific tasks and responsibilities of an AI engineer:
Create and manage the AI development and production infrastructure
Conduct statistical analysis and interpret the results to guide and optimize the organization’s decision-making process
Automate AI infrastructures for the data science team
Build AI models from scratch and help product managers and other stakeholders with analysis and implementation
Transform machine learning models into APIs that can be integrated with other applications
Collaborate across teams to help with AI adoption and best practices 

I engineer salary and job outlook
AI engineering is a specialized field that has promising job growth and tends to pay well. 
According to Glassdoor, the median total salary for an AI engineer is $138,000 in the United States as of October 2025 [1]. This figure includes base salary and additional pay, which may represent profit-sharing, commissions, bonuses, or other compensation. Falling under the categories of computer and information research scientists, AI engineers have a median salary of $140,910, according to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) [3]. 
There is a projected job growth of 20 percent between 2024 and 2034, which is much faster than the average for all occupations [3]. According to a Q1 2025 job market analysis by Veritone, AI/ML engineer jobs are one of the fastest-growing AI roles, showing a 41.8 percent year-on-year increase [4].
AI engineers typically work for tech companies like Google, IBM, and Meta, among others, helping them improve their products, software, operations, and delivery. They may also be employed more and more in government and research facilities that work to improve public services. 
How to become an AI engineer
Becoming an AI engineer requires basic computer, information technology (IT), and math skills, as these are critical to maneuvering artificial intelligence programs. Here’s how you can get started in AI engineering.
1. Learn the skills needed. 
You’ll need to build your technical skills, including knowledge of the tools that AI engineers typically use. 
Programming: You’ll want to learn programming languages such as Python, R, Java, and C++ so you can build and implement models.
Probability, statistics, and linear algebra: These are needed to implement different AI and machine learning models.
Big data technologies: AI engineers work with large amounts of data, so you’ll be required to know Apache Spark, Hadoop, and MongoDB to manage it all.
Algorithms and frameworks: You’ll want to understand machine learning algorithms such as linear regression and Naive Bayes, as well as deep learning algorithms, such as recurrent neural networks and generative adversarial networks, and be able to implement them with a framework. Common AI frameworks include Theano, TensorFlow, Caffe, Keras, and PyTorch.
You can learn these skills through online courses or boot camps specially designed to help you launch your career in artificial intelligence. 