What Is a Data Scientist? Salary, Duties + How to Become One

A data scientist uses data to understand and explain the phenomena around them, and help organizations make better decisions.

Data scientists use their knowledge and expertise to help organizations make more informed, data-driven decisions. At a glance, here's what you need to know about data scientists:
They're in demand. According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), job openings for data scientists are projected to grow by 34 percent between 2024 and 2034 [1].
At their core, data scientists are problem solvers. Common duties include finding patterns in datasets, creating algorithms and data models, and deploying data tools like R and SQL in data analysis.
While most data scientists possess a degree in a related field, it's possible to build the required skills by a taking courses or attending bootcamps.
Below, we'll discuss what data scientists do and how to become one. Afterward, if you're interested in pursuing a career as a data scientist, consider enrolling in the IBM Data Science Professional Certificate. You'll learn the tools, languages, and libraries used by professional data scientists, including Python and SQL.

What does a data scientist do?
Data scientists determine the questions their team should be asking and figure out how to answer those questions using data. They often develop predictive models for theorizing and forecasting.
A data scientist might do the following tasks on a day-to-day basis:
Find patterns and trends in datasets to uncover insights
Create algorithms and data models to forecast outcomes
Use machine learning techniques to improve the quality of data or product offerings
Communicate recommendations to other teams and senior staff
Deploy data tools such as Python, R, SAS, or SQL in data analysis
Stay on top of innovations in the data science field
Thanks to this work, a data science career can be intellectually challenging and analytically satisfying while also putting you at the forefront of new technologies.
Data scientist salary and job growth

A data scientist earns a median salary of $112,590, according to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics [1]. Demand is high for data professionals—data scientists occupations are expected to grow by 36 percent in the next 10 years (much faster than average), according to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).

Data scientist jobs
Data science jobs are becoming commonplace and necessary for companies across the globe to optimize quality and financial growth. At a glance, here are some in-demand data science jobs you should consider exploring in the field:
Data scientists identify the questions their teams should ask and figure out how to answer them with data. Using their advanced knowledge and experience, data scientists must often develop predictive models and algorithms to theorize and forecast outcomes.
Data analysts collect, analyze, evaluate, review, organize, and visualize data. They use various techniques, such as statistical and cluster analysis, to identify trends that help others make more informed business decisions.
Data engineers build systems that can automatically collect, store, manage, and analyze data sets so that other data professionals can spot trends and patterns for interpretation.
Data architects create plans for systems to manage and organize data, then oversee the construction of those systems, so that other data professionals can do their jobs.
Machine learning engineers design the architecture for artificial intelligence (AI) programs to interact with large data sets.
Business intelligence engineers design, install, maintain, and develop data systems that analyze large chunks of data specifically for financial and business purposes.
Data scientist vs. data analyst: What’s the difference?

The work of data analysts and data scientists can seem similar—both find trends or patterns in data to reveal new ways for organizations to make better decisions about operations. But data scientists tend to have greater responsibility and are generally considered more senior than data analysts. 
Data scientists are often expected to formulate their own questions about the data, while data analysts might support teams that already have set goals. A data scientist might also spend more time developing models, using machine learning, or incorporating advanced programming to find and analyze data.

How to become a data scientist
Becoming a data scientist generally requires some formal training. Here are some steps to consider.

1. Earn a degree.
Employers generally like to see some academic credentials to ensure you have the know-how to tackle a data science job, though it’s not always required. About 51 percent of data scientists have a bachelor's, while 34 percent have a master's [2].
If you're considering a degree, majors like computer science, statistics, or data science (if available as a specific program) are great foundations. If you already have a bachelor's degree, a master's degree can be an excellent way to pivot into the field. At the master's level, you'll gain a firm understanding of statistics, machine learning, algorithms, modeling, and forecasting.

2. Or learn about data science in other ways.
If a degree is not a commitment you're ready to make just yet, consider alternative types of education to bolster your knowledge and build your skill set. Individual courses, specializations, and professional certificates are all great ways to grow familiar with the subject matter while working with tools that will strengthen your technical abilities.

3. Sharpen relevant skills.
If you feel like you can polish some of your technical and interpersonal skills, think about taking an online course or enrolling in a relevant boot camp. Here are some of the skills you’ll want to have under your belt.
Programming languages: Popular programming languages for data science include Python, R, SQL, and SAS.
Data visualization: Familiarity with data visualization tools like Tableau, Power BI, and Excel is essential for data scientists.
Machine learning: Incorporating machine learning and deep learning into your work as a data scientist means continuously improving the quality of the data you gather and potentially being able to predict the outcomes of future datasets. A course in machine learning can get you started with the basics.
Big data: Some employers may want to see that you have some familiarity in grappling with big data. Some of the software frameworks used to process big data include Hadoop and Apache Spark.
Communication: The ability to share ideas and results verbally and in written language is an often-sought skill for data scientists.
Artificial intelligence (AI): Generative AI is increasingly prevalent across data science work streams, including to clean, organize, and analyze data. Learning how to use AI for data science, consequently, is imperative for those who want to enter into the field today.

4. Explore data scientist jobs.
Though there are many paths to becoming a data scientist, starting a related entry-level job can be an excellent first step. Seek positions that work heavily with data, such as data analyst, business intelligence analyst, statistician, or data engineer. From there, you can work your way up to becoming a scientist as you expand your knowledge and skills.

5. Prepare for data science interviews.
With a few years of experience working with data analytics, you might feel ready to move into data science. Once you’ve scored an interview, prepare answers to likely data science interview questions. 
Data scientist positions can be highly technical, so you may encounter technical and behavioral questions. Anticipate both, and practice by speaking your answer aloud. Preparing examples from your past work or academic experiences can help you appear confident and knowledgeable to interviewers.
Here are a few questions you might encounter:
What are the pros and cons of a linear model?
What is a random forest?
How would you use SQL to find all duplicates in a data set?
Describe your experience with machine learning.
Give an example of a time you encountered a problem you didn’t know how to solve. What did you do?

How long does it take to become a data scientist?

The amount of time it takes to become a data scientist depends on your previous experience, education, and skills. If you're transitioning into data science from a related career such as software engineering or machine learning, gaining the required competencies through certificate programs or online classes may only take a few months.
However, if you do not have a background in data and wish to pursue a data science career, you may need to earn at least a bachelor's degree or gain foundational knowledge and experience in the field through certificates and training to pursue this career.
If you're considering earning a degree to break into the field, you'll spend around four to five years earning a bachelor's degree (in computer science or a related field) and an additional two years earning a master's degree. This timeline can vary depending on your chosen course and method of study.

